Create getting-started-with-lighthouse.md (#766)
vtex-apps/io-documentation: docs/en/Recipes/store-management/debugging-performance-issues.md

# Debugging performance issues

In the e-commerce business, website performance and user experience are closely connected. That means that performance can directly impact sales conversion rate, user session time, among other relevant metrics.

A series of tools are available to measure website performance, such as [Lighthouse](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse)/[PageSpeed Insights](https://developers.google.com/speed/pagespeed/insights/) and [SpeedCurve](https://speedcurve.com/).

Keeping an eye on how your store's website performs is essential for delivering a fast and efficient solution to final users.

With that in mind, the following [section](#step-by-step) intends to guide you when debugging performance issues, aiming for high scores in Lighthouse audits.

>⚠️ *The practices presented in this doc are intended to guide you when debugging your store's performance, they do not provide definitive solutions. For information on how to improve performance, [folow this link](https://developers.vtex.com/vtex-developer-docs/docs/vtex-io-documentation-best-practices-for-optimizing-performance).*

# Step by step

> Before proceeding, we recommend that you run [Lighthouse](https://developers.google.com/speed/pagespeed/insights/), considering the production workspace you're currently working in, by using the following URL pattern `https://{account}.myvtex.com/?workspace={workspace}`, and take note of your store's performance.

Reviewer: Nessa seção, acho que vale um heads up dizendo que se a loja já tiver em produção para rodar com o domínio da loja que o usuário final acessa. Até poque o pagespeed insights só funciona com domínio público.

>⚠️ ***Keep in mind:** you must always use the `?workspace={workspace}` query string to analyze performance in a production workspace. Using the standard URL pattern `https://{workspace}--{account}.myvtex.com/` won't show the performance score of your store in the specified workspace.*

Also, when running Lighthouse, consider analyzing pages from different contexts separately. For example, run specific audits for the Home, Search, Category, and Product pages.

## Step 1: Testing the server-side rendering

Most websites use JavaScript to support a dynamic and interactive user experience.

Generally, the amount of JavaScript that is shipped to the browser increases as the application complexity grows, for example, with the inclusion of third-party scripts and other JavaScript libraries.

> However,  it is important to remember that JavaScript handles data fetching, templating, and routing on the client-side rather than on the server-side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it is important to remember that JavaScript handles data fetching, templating, and routing on the client-side rather than on the server-side.
```

>ℹ️ *If applicable, check Google's documentation on [how to disable javascript in Google Chrome](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/javascript/disable).*

When performing this test, your store will probably not function the same way as planned. However, its core functionalities may work as expected. Take the following subsections as a reference:

### Undesired behaviors

- The page does not render anything.
- Instead of updating only the different content, the page is fully refreshed when navigating to another page.
- Misplaced layout.

### Expected behaviors

- Simpler design.
- Animations and interactive menus do not work.
- The below-the-fold content does not render.

>ℹ️ *Before Google crawlers incorporated and improved the indexing of JavaScript content and links capability, SEO used to be a common concern for websites based on JavaScript. Even though this issue has been addressed, be aware that other search engines might not have this feature yet.*

## Step 2: Checking the effect of third-party apps

> One of the first actions to debug performance issues is to test the desired page without *Pixel apps*.

Reviewer: Talvez linkar para essa doc https://vtex.io/docs/concepts/pixel-app/

# Debugging performance issues

In the e-commerce business, website performance and user experience are closely connected. That means that performance can directly impact sales conversion rate, user session time, among other relevant metrics.

A series of tools are available to measure website performance, such as [Lighthouse](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse)/[PageSpeed Insights](https://developers.google.com/speed/pagespeed/insights/) and [SpeedCurve](https://speedcurve.com/).

Keeping an eye on how your store's website performs is essential for delivering a fast and efficient solution to final users.

With that in mind, the following [section](#step-by-step) intends to guide you when debugging performance issues, aiming for high scores in Lighthouse audits.

>⚠️ *The practices presented in this doc are intended to guide you when debugging your store's performance, they do not provide definitive solutions. For information on how to improve performance, [folow this link](https://developers.vtex.com/vtex-developer-docs/docs/vtex-io-documentation-best-practices-for-optimizing-performance).*

# Step by step

> Before proceeding, we recommend that you run [Lighthouse](https://developers.google.com/speed/pagespeed/insights/), considering the production workspace you're currently working in, by using the following URL pattern `https://{account}.myvtex.com/?workspace={workspace}`, and take note of your store's performance.

Author: ```suggestion
Before proceeding any further, we recommend that you run [Lighthouse](https://developers.google.com/speed/pagespeed/insights/) using the following URL pattern `https://{account}.myvtex.com/?workspace={workspace}`, given the production workspace you're currently working, and take note of your store's performance. You can also analyze the store in production. In this case, please consider the URL available to end-users. 
```

>ℹ️ *If applicable, check Google's documentation on [how to disable javascript in Google Chrome](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/javascript/disable).*

When performing this test, your store will probably not function the same way as planned. However, its core functionalities may work as expected. Take the following subsections as a reference:

### Undesired behaviors

- The page does not render anything.
- Instead of updating only the different content, the page is fully refreshed when navigating to another page.
- Misplaced layout.

### Expected behaviors

- Simpler design.
- Animations and interactive menus do not work.
- The below-the-fold content does not render.

>ℹ️ *Before Google crawlers incorporated and improved the indexing of JavaScript content and links capability, SEO used to be a common concern for websites based on JavaScript. Even though this issue has been addressed, be aware that other search engines might not have this feature yet.*

## Step 2: Checking the effect of third-party apps

> One of the first actions to debug performance issues is to test the desired page without *Pixel apps*.

Author: ```suggestion
One of the first actions to debug performance issues is to test the desired page without [Pixel apps](https://developers.vtex.com/vtex-developer-docs/docs/vtex-io-documentation-pixel-app).
```

## Step 4: Identifying heavy scripts

Use [SpeedCurve](https://speedcurve.com/) or any other tool of your preference to detect your website's heaviest scripts, and consider:

- Removing them.
- Replacing them with lighter and similar scripts. 
- Implementing alternative loading solutions with a lower negative impact on performance.

## Step 5: Enabling performance settings

To help you guarantee the success of your brand's online presence, we provide a series of performance settings, which can be enabled at your stores's admin, under *Store Setup > CMS > Store > Advanced*.

>ℹ️ *Follow [this link](https://developers.vtex.com/vtex-developer-docs/docs/vtex-io-documentation-best-practices-for-optimizing-performance) to learn about the currently available performance settings.*

>ℹ️ *Follow [this link](https://developers.vtex.com/vtex-developer-docs/docs/vtex-io-documentation-safely-enabling-performance-settings) to learn how to safely enable performance settings.*

We recommend that you gradually enable the available features and measure their impact using Lighthouse and other tools.

## Step 6: Testing the critical CSS

> The content which a user first sees when opening a web page is known as above-the-fold. Besides, since this part of the page must be loaded quickly for better user experience, it can also be referred to as critical.
> 
> Fortunately, VTEX IO offers the possibility of enabling critical CSS optimization in home pages, product pages and product listing pages. This feature provides the browser a way to find the minimum blocks of CSS code needed to first display the critical content of the page. Meanwhile, the remainder CSS code is loaded asynchronously.
> 
> [Learn how to optimize critical CSS](https://developers.vtex.com/vtex-developer-docs/docs/vtex-io-documentation-best-practices-for-optimizing-performance#optimizing-critical-css)
> 
> To work, critical CSS optimization requires that the page is server-side rendered and that CSS concatenation is also enabled.
> 
> The critical CSS served to the pages can vary by viewport and page, and the process of optimizing it for each page can take some time. Because of this, the optimization may not present when you (or some other user) first open a page. Only subsequent users that access that same page (with a similar viewport) after a while will receive the optimized version.
> 
> On the product pages, for example, some products may have SKU selectors, while others don't. These pages don't share the same critical optimization, since serving SKU selector styles for the page that doesn't have this component would be pointless. Similarly, two users accessing the same page using distinct devices such as mobile and desktop won't share the same optimization.
> 
> After enabling the critical CSS optimization, you can check if it's being delivered by ensuring the page is being server-side rendered (Step 1) and searching for the style tag `<style id="critical" type="text/css">` inside the `<head>` tag of the page you enabled the optimization. Remember to consider that it takes a while for it to be processed and that it varies per viewport and page, as stated above.

Author: ```suggestion
VTEX IO offers the option of [enabling critical CSS optimization](https://developers.vtex.com/vtex-developer-docs/docs/vtex-io-documentation-best-practices-for-optimizing-performance#optimizing-critical-css) in home pages, product pages, and product listing pages. This feature allows the browser to find the minimum CSS code blocks needed to display the page's critical content first. Meanwhile, the remainder CSS code is loaded asynchronously.

>ℹ️ Critical, also known as above-the-fold, refers to the portion of a web page a user sees when first loading a page. Notice that, for a good user experience, the critical content needs to be loaded quickly. Follow [this link](https://developers.vtex.com/vtex-developer-docs/docs/vtex-io-documentation-best-practices-for-optimizing-performance#optimizing-critical-css) to learn how to optimize critical CSS.

Critical CSS optimization requires that the page is server-side rendered and that CSS concatenation is enabled. Also, the process of optimizing CSS for each page can take some time and varies depending on the page and viewport size.

>⚠️ CSS optimization may not respond immediately. Only after different users access the same page using a similar viewport will the CSS's optimized version take effect. Take product pages as an example: some products may have SKU selectors, while others don't. Since it isn't necessary to serve SKU selector styles for product pages that don't have this component, product pages might not share the same critical optimization. Similarly, two users accessing the same page using different devices, such as mobile and desktop, won't share the same optimization.

Hence, after enabling the critical CSS optimization, check if your pages are being optimized:

1. Make sure your pages are server-side rendered (Step 1)
2. Look for the style tag `<style id="critical" type="text/css">` inside the `<head>` tag of the corresponding pages. 
```
